---
layout: default
title: Sweeping Minesweeper to Make Mine
date: 2021-03-23
---

Sweeping Minesweeper to Make Mine
=================================

At the time of writing this article, Minesweeper lives 
[here](https://github.com/batfish/batfish/tree/2021-03-16-minesweeper/projects/minesweeper/src).
For my Networks course, my team and I have chosen to reimplement Minesweeper
by [Beckett et al. 2017](https://network-programming.org/papers/minesweeper.pdf)
in Scala. We wrote a report illustrating the fruit of our efforts. This post
describes how we grew that fruit. 

Background on Minesweeper
-------------------------

Minesweeper is a powerful network verification tool which is reported to 
achieve *high network design coverage* (i.e. support for various kinds of 
network topologies, routing protocols, etc.), *high data plane coverage* (i.e. 
can analyze a significant number (quantity?) of data planes), while remaining
scalable to real networks. The tool translates user-specified network 
configuration files and network properties into Z3 SMT constraints. 
The language of SMT constraints is enough to warrant two concrete departures 
from prior network testing literature:
(1) Users could reason about graphs instead of just paths.
(2) Users could *combinationally search* for messages, allowing them to 
    abstract over several possible tests and verify conditions for all of them 
    at once.

The authors also propose two very simple optimizations which apparently make a 
very big difference in performance: slicing and hoisting. It is was surprising 
to my team and I that these optimizations make a difference, because we thought 
that Z3 would perform similar optimizations on its own. However, we didn't 
understand the finer implementation details of the paper at first, nor did we 
have a thorough understanding of how SMT solvers worked.

Code Sweep
----------

The code for Minesweeper lives in the Batfish repository. This is surprising,
because Batfish is another verification tool that Beckett et al. contrast
against Minesweeper. The codebase was larger than we expected for the concepts
given in the paper, and a very large chunk of it was simply interacting with
Batfish libraries. We found this suspicious, since, as given in the paper:

"""
Control plane analysistools such as Batfish [13] can find con-figuration errors proactively, before deploying potentially buggyconfigurations. Batfish takes the network configuration (i.e., its con-trol plane) and a specific environment (e.g., a link-failure scenario)as input and analyzes the resulting data plane. This ability allowsoperators to go beyond the current data plane and analyze futuredata planes that may arise under different environments. Still, eachrun of Batfish allows users to explore at most one data plane, andgiven the large number of possible environments, it is intractableto guarantee correctness for all possible data planes.
"""

We weren't sure how to begin grokking this code -- there was no documentation,
and comments were sparse and seemed personalised for the authors of the code.
We decided that the best way to go about it was to start naively rewriting the
code. The original implementation was in Java. Translating Java code to Scala
naively is a trivial task. Cleaning the code of antipatterns, on the other 
hand, is a much more daunting task. For instance, references being null is
*allowed* in Scala to allow interoperability with Java, but is considered an
antipattern and are replaced with Option types. However, we believed that this
route was the surest to completion of our re-implementation, and that would
allow us to spend more time considering further optimizations to the system

---

A few weeks later, we were still refactoring code and trying to makes sense of 
it. My lack of experience with large codebases was sorely showing, and we came
to two key realizations.

1. The bulk of the work of translating the code came from the dependencies on
   Batfish, which is a Java library and thus has no concern for Scala
   antipatterns.
2. Batfish data structures are being used, but no Batfish analyses.

We began to contemplate whether we should proceed with the translation as per
the course, or whether it was worth depending on Batfish at all. After all, 
learning to work with Batfish wasn't central to the problem that the 
Minesweeper paper was trying to solve, and we weren't as interested in that.

Pivot
-----

Our re-implementation was not going as planned. We were spending absurd amounts
of time, but were still struggling to the finer details in the paper to their
counterparts in the code. It was time for a heavy decision. 

1. Do we continue as par, with the knowledge that this route will lead to 
   completion, but maybe not in the required timeframe?
2. Or do attempt to implement Minesweeper from the principles laid out in 
   the paper?

We decided to try the latter for a bit to gain an understanding of the scale 
of such a project and whether we'd be able to implement it before the semester
was over. ;P

We were surprised at how straightforward it was to encode the ideas of the 
paper. We decided to pursue this route, and changed the story we were trying
to tell.

Question Formation
------------------

When we started this project, our goals were:

1. To reimplement Minesweeper in Scala
2. To record any potential benefits to choosing Scala over Java
3. To understand why the optimizations proposed in the paper were necessary, 
   and why Z3 wasn't "smart enough" to figure those out on its own.
4. To use this understanding to potentially experiment with new optimizations.

However, after the pivot, we were able to refine these goals further:

1. To implement Minesweeper as described in the original paper, with no
   dependency on Batfish.
2. To model Minesweeper explicitly using a compiler architecture, with an 
   intermediate language upon which we can perform optimizations.
3. To see if slicing and hoisting described in the original paper can be 
   performed using standard, off-the-shelf compiler optimizations.
4. To see if our intermediate made any additional optimizations apparent.

Minesweeper: A Compiler
-----------------------

The project got a lot more exciting now that we were making measurable 
progress. 

### Syntax

We simultaneously developed two layers of our compiler:

1. **A high-level language to express the network topology, configuration and
   expected properties.**
   The network topology was represented as a graph, where the vertices could
   be routers or subnets. Control-plane configuration at every router was
   specified by a control plane record at every incoming and outgoing edge.
   We further supported import/export filters at every vertex. Data-plane
   configuration came in the form of access control lists (ACLs). 
   The kind of analyses that Minesweeper does quantifies over all data packets,
   but users can selectively refine this by concretely fixing the fields of our 
   universally quantified packet. We also provided abstractions for each
   property that we wanted to check (reachability, isolation, fault tolerance,
   etc.).

2. **An intermediate representation, which was a thin wrapper on Z3 smtlib.**
   We could perform optimizations on this language.

### Semantics

Next, we constructed the following denotations:

1. **From our high-level language to our IR**. This translation follows
   directly from sections 3 and 4 in the paper.
2. **From our IR to Z3 programs**. 

### Optimizations

Being able to emit IR code naively and then optimize after-the-fact simplified
our IR-emission phase, and allowed us to apply optimizations in a standard
manner. We implemented unused variable elimination and constant propagation. 
At this point, it became evident that slicing as described in the paper could be 
recovered by using:

1. *Unused variable elimination* to get rid of symbolic variables that do not 
   affect the properties we're checking for 
2. *Partial evaluation* to simplify logical formulae
3. *Constant propagation* to reduce redundant symbolic variables

Z3 cannot perform all of these because Z3 doesn't know that we only care about 
the symbolic variables that affect the properties that we're checking for.

Similarly, hoisting can be implemented as a compiler pass. Hoisting 
essentially inlines a relation between the destination IP and the prefix
of a control plane record.

Does It Work Though?
--------------------

We wrote tests for a few basic networks that we defined, and our compiler
indeed spat out SMT constraints that we could throw at Z3, and Z3 did actually
give us the expected result every time! However, gaining confidence in our
system via more systematic unit testing of each component is something I plan 
to do, since we don't actually have network configuration data that we can 
test our compiler on.

Concluding Remarks
------------------

This project was useful to me in the following concrete ways:
1. Constructing the abstractions for the network alongside the course lectures
   gave me more confidence in my understanding of computer networks.
2. It lowered the barrier of entry into SMT literature, and provided me with
   a general method of constructing domain-specific relational languages on
   top of Z3.
3. It allowed me to familiarize myself with Scala! I study type systems which
   have inspired Scala's design, but I have relatively little experience Scala
   itself. Using traits with self-recursive types to express exactly what kind
   of IR expression a high-level language expression compiles to was 
   delightful.

Acknowledgements
----------------

To faculty of my Networks course, Dr. Muhammad Shahbaz, who put this project
on our syllabus and provided guidance when we asked. This was a great learning
experience.

To Dr. Ryan Beckett, for answering some of our questions about his paper. His
input was crucial to our decision to implement Minesweeper from scratch.
